And we're rolling.
We're talking to our own French.
I guess a very interesting book.
Would you describe this as a career, as a departure for you as a fiction writer?
Well, when I began it, I thought it might be because I began it at a very low point in my life when I was extremely ill and did not expect to live.
And I thought I was going to write a comic novel.
which I thought was sort of fitting for a dying person to write.
Well, I didn't die, and it's turned into a comic novel.
So, but that's how I started it.
Really, I'm sorry.
I didn't know about your illness.
Is this anything?
Nobody does.
It's okay.
Don't worry about it.
Well, can I use this in the piece?
I don't think so, Nick, because it's not that I'm keeping it a secret.
I am recovered, and although, you know, no one expected me to, and...
It doesn't have anything to do with the book except that it was started under this kind of odd impulse.
Okay, well, that is... But to pursue this, and I will certainly not discuss the illness, but why a comic novel under these profoundly disturbing circumstances?
Well, I think that one of the things you find out when you get very sick is that...
Life goes by opposite.
You know, it's been revealing to me in many ways.
And in fact, I'm writing a book about it.
How about your illness?
Yes.
So I can say in the piece that you were, because you're writing about it, that you were seriously ill.
We can certainly say that, right?
You certainly may.
Okay, go ahead.
You know, we raise our children and we try to arrange things for them so that
They have mainly pleasure and joy in their lives and not sorrow and pain.
But in fact, when you are in pain and when you're frightened or in a state of dread or whatever, your pleasure is enhanced.
Your sense of joy is much greater than it is under normal circumstances.
You take pleasure in ordinary things, huge pleasure in ordinary things that you never felt when you were well.
and i think you can see the comedy of life much more keenly when you're really gripped by feeling rather tragic about yourself so you expected this then to be your your final book yes i did if i lived to finish it you know i didn't even so you didn't even i mean
How long did the book take you to write?
Well, because I sort of passed out of the picture after that.
I wrote a couple of chapters, and then they put me in a coma.
And by the time I was able to work again, it was a year later.
I'm sorry, how many years?
Well, you see, I had to finish.
I did come out of the coma, but I was very sick.
I'm sorry I didn't know any of this.
I had to revise Our Father.
And then I revised a history I've been working on for years and years.
And only then did I get around to George again.
And so it was at least two years later.
and well i'm just amazed i didn't you know do you know how you have an expectation that an interview will follow a certain certain path this was not the path you just kind of threw me off of this entire and it is it's fascinating i have to say uh did you expect how did you expect this to be read then do you think i don't expect it to be read um
I guess the did and the do.
With my life story in mind.
I mean, I didn't put it in there, and I don't want it in there.
But it is, after all, about the absurdity of our longing for this absolute love or love happily ever after or whatever that everyone seems to experience.
I mean, I can't swear that all men do because most men refuse to admit it.
But a couple of men have admitted it to me.
Have admitted?
That they feel this longing.
Women all admit it.
I mean, right across the board.
And it is an absurd longing and an absurd need, and it drives us all our lives long.
And it's kind of pathetic, but in a way, it's also... I very much like the ending of this novel because I'm suggesting it's what keeps us alive, and it's...
It's part of the life force to strive.
Well, speaking of the ending, without, you know, intending in any way to take away the pleasure of it, but I enjoy the comment on page 241 where you say, that's the great thing about being a writer.
You can make everything up except your life.
And now that you've given me this context, I think...
i have a sense here you know which of what you're talking about there and then you also talk pardon me but at the very end but but there it is there it remains my spirit is still a girl's trapped inside a deteriorating container i think this is expressing precisely what you've just kind of uh told me about in a way i guess um
Who, I guess, always try to get back on track here.
You really derailed me here.
That's a marvelous story.
You saw this then as, I guess, the concluding work.
So when I ask a young, emerging, first-time novelist, how do you expect to see your career develop?
You were actually seeing this as the final word, so to speak, I guess, as what you've just told me.
But now we're still talking then about your career and the arc of your career.
And I guess maybe are you prepared at all to discuss your career as a fiction writer?
And do you see it as a corpus and how this book fits into that corpus?
Well, I do in a way, although I think probably it's not neat.
I don't know that anybody says neat.
The novels seem to have a shape of their own as far as my intentions go.
The first one being about women's experience, women's relations with other women, women's work, which had never been written about seriously before.
I mean, their work in the house, which hadn't been taken seriously in fiction.
I don't know that it is even now, but I took it seriously in the women's room.
And the next one was about love between a man and a woman, passionate, lustful love.
and the possibilities of building on it, which I did not find very positive.
And the third was about relations between mothers and daughters and the terrific complications of them and the hate as well as love that entered into that relationship.
And our father, which I think nobody understood whatever,
because there was a father in it who was pretty horrible, because I modeled the book on the Brothers Karamazov, which also has an absolutely, unbelievably vicious father, and at four sons, one illegitimate.
But what I found so striking about the Brothers Karamazov, not when I read it, because I read it when I was 18, but years later, rereading it,
was the relations among the sons as Dostoevsky depicts them because they're so sweet to each other.
They're so loving to each other.
I have never met brothers like that.
Most brothers I know are filled with resentment and envy for their brothers.
All kinds of very bad feelings dominate brotherly relations, it seems to me, as they often do sisterly relations.
And I was surprised.
because I adore that he had lied about this.
And especially when all of the sons, except Smerdyakov, stand to inherit, and none of them was brought up together.
They have different mothers.
They have not known each other since childhood.
You can say that that's an additional reason for them to be friendly to each other or like each other because they're strangers to each other.
But it's also a very strong reason for them to dislike each other.
Anyway, I thought a lot about that.
And I was thinking about the state of feminism at the time and the way the difficulties of women of different classes and colors and ages making common cause.
It's very hard.
You think about a place like Mexico, say, or any other Latin country where many women have brilliant careers and...
very lovely lives.
They're married to important men.
They have children.
They have their career.
And they can do this because servants are so cheap in these countries.
They can get five women to work in their houses for practically nothing.
And it's only because they keep these women, what we used to say, barefoot in the summer, pregnant in the winter and barefoot in the summer.
The upper classes keep the poorer classes down
that they're able to have the nice lives they have.
So it's very hard for women of different classes to make common cause since their desires are really at odds with each other.
And that's what I wrote that book about, women's relations with each other.
But no one picked that up, no one, absolutely no one.
But the title was kind of got you... Yes, because it all goes back to the patriarchal system, and our father is, in a sense, responsible.
and the fact that they all worship.
Of course, it also invokes the Lord's prayer, too, doesn't it?
Anyway, so that book was that.
And that I should end my life.
Now, I'm leaving out the literary criticism, and I'm leaving out the philosophical books and the sociological books.
Because those are quite apart from the fictive world.
They're not really, but they're not part of the story in a way.
To end with a kind of
wry, testimonial to the power of sexual love seems to me right.
I don't know.
I visualize certain lines in print, and I can see that perfectly.
It's a wonderful quote right there.
Thank you.
I'm sorry, did I interrupt?
No, no.
That was excellent.
You said you don't see the nonfiction apart from the novels.
No, I think the same concerns fill everything I've written.
Nothing comes from any other place but the center of me.
And the literary criticism is very much apart.
My general philosophy and Beyond Power sort of encapsulates my philosophy.
Although I suppose it's hard to speak of a book that long encapsulating anything.
But it does contain...
Now, I was going over some of the reviews of your books.
That book was described by some of your reviewers as an angry book.
Which one?
Our Father.
I mean, even in the press material that came up, sent out.
Do you agree with that, or do you challenge that?
No, it's full of rage, because the sisters hate each other.
The author is not angry.
The masters are.
A lot of people get confused.
But you see, and again, even in the New York Times review, which was, I would say, a positive review, and certainly the Times names it again this week as one of their editor's choices, so the editors certainly must agree with that as well.
There's a sense of a mellowing here.
So if there's a mellowing, I mean, this is a suggestion of the critic.
then it's a mellowing from what?
From an angry writer.
So, I mean, do you disagree that you were an anger?
Do you challenge the contention that you were, quote, unquote, an angry writer?
No.
You know it.
You know, on Jonathan Swift's Tombstone, oh, I wish I could quote it for you, but it's Latin and I can't.
It's Saevo, well,
Realize one who lived in savage indignation.
And that's very much the way I feel or certainly felt.
I think I probably don't live in savage indignation anymore.
Did he pick that for himself?
I guess I believe he did.
That's wonderful, isn't it?
Yeah, it is.
There's nothing wrong with being angry when you face a world full of injustice and cruelty.
I don't know why people use the word angry as if it were
as if it were a moral failure.
Well, it's almost easy then for some of the people who don't like you to typecast you in a way, isn't it?
Oh, she's an angry woman, you know?
I'm sure that where you've been described in a Globe piece as the woman so many men love to hate.
I mean, you've seen that phrase, I'm sure as well.
That was in the Times, yeah.
Was that in the Times?
I've not particularly seen that before, but it's certainly true.
It is true.
Is that right?
You would agree with it?
Well, it certainly feels that way.
I'm sorry, but we were talking about the nonfiction, I guess.
The nonfiction is not angry because it's not a novel.
You don't need anger in nonfiction.
You need anger in fiction.
when you don't put anger in nonfiction.
No, you're an academic, you're an intellectual, you write seriously about important matters, you're a novelist.
Do you have a feeling, a conviction that
the novels that you write should be relevant i mean uh is that is that an essential aspect of the novel in your view and by extension therefore would you say obviously all of your novels are relevant in your view they were written with a purpose beyond storytelling i guess although i think this is a wonderful story this this novel here well i think all of them um
I don't know that I ever wrote a novel with the idea that I had a message.
No, I don't think so.
But in both my novels and my literary criticism, and this caused me some difficulty as a literary critic, not with the books I published, but with shorter art pieces, because I'm not interested in writing about literature unless I am also writing about life.
Hmm.
this may seem, well, I don't know.
The fact is it's not as easy to publish criticism that has some direct relation to human life than it is things that are written more or less in a vacuum that are simply literary studies.
Say you're studying the imagery.
I don't think they do this anymore, but when I was in school,
there were lots of articles and even books studying the imagery of a particular poet in a particular work and it was they were often simply compilations of the kinds of imagery i have no interest in doing anything like that i wrote a piece on measure for measure i gave as a speech uh in which i show that the the women complaining at the ending of the play of sexual are really
They're protesting to the Duke who has come back home to the city.
And they're saying that Angelo did these terrible things to them while he was gone, the Duke.
And what Angelo is really guilty of is sexual harassment to the nth degree.
And what I found really fascinating, rereading Measure for Measure, because I was going to be speaking at Stratford, Ontario, and they were doing Measure for Measure that year.
That's why I chose the play.
To read these arguments again that the Duke and Angelo use against the women, and they are exactly the comments that the Senate Select Committee or whatever it was on Clarence Thomas used against Anita Hill.
I found that staggering.
That's amazing.
I wrote a paper about it.
I've never published it.
Yeah.
I don't write novels that way, though.
I don't write novels with the idea that I'm going to point to something that's going on in the world and make a comment on it.
I really try to write novels with the idea that I want to depict experience as I understand it honestly without distortions of a fantasy, of a
that exist in so much women's literature even now the happily ever after ending is one of those you don't find that very often anymore but we've all been raised on it um you know i've asked any number of novelists over the years um
And the consensus seems to be, although with a few notable exceptions, that each book certainly speaks for a period in their life and their development, that even if given the chance, they wouldn't go back and tinker with any books.
Although I know Tim O'Brien is an exception.
He's confided in me that he's gone in and changed going after Cacciato in significant ways.
Really?
And to the point that he got a letter from a professor who was reading from one edition and the students were reading in paperback in another.
I was saying, what the hell is going on here?
You know, this is not the same.
We're not reading the same book.
But I would have to believe that you feel that completed work is completed work, and it absolutely does speak for yourself, where you were at that point in your life.
This is an expression of what you were doing at that point in your life.
I guess that's just asking for a general comment.
But, I mean, the women's room...
Really, that was 1977.
That was a 70s book, I would say, right?
There's no way that you could write that in the 90s.
And this is a 90s book.
I don't think you could write this book in the 70s or the 80s.
It's certainly set in the 90s, too.
I guess I'm just looking for a general comment on that.
I don't know where I'm going with that as a question.
No, I think you're right.
I don't know what it means either, except that things are rooted in
That one is rooted in time and things are rooted in one and I don't know what else to say.
Yeah, but I guess where you said earlier at the beginning that you thought that you would, for this book, for the reasons you've already given,
It was time maybe for a lighter, a comic touch.
And I guess now I understand why you picked a romance writer.
Just a wonderful touch.
Even her name has any number of different resonances, I would think as well.
But do you see this as a love story?
it is a love story.
This is quite a departure for you, isn't it?
I mean, in a way, isn't it?
Do you think?
Bleeding Heart was a love story.
It also had a sadder ending.
No, I don't think that's a departure.
Okay.
And I used the title of the... I gave the title of Bleeding Heart to that novel, although it's far from a romance, but to...
to point up the romance elements.
Just about all of my books make comments on other literature, although, again, no one has ever picked that up.
The only person who did was Ann Barton, reviewing my Shakespeare book for the New York Review of Books, from which she did not review the Shakespeare book, but reviewed The Women's Room, because there's so much about Shakespeare in The Women's Room.
And indeed there is, because I'm always using these things as counterpoint to whatever the story is I'm telling.
So that Hermione, being a romance writer, you know how her books end.
And her own ending is so very different.
And in fact, the ending to all her romances has not been happy, even when it was happy for a time.
she loses these guys or they die or something.
Only in the New York Review of Books could you get away with a review like that.
I know.
It was really cruel.
I should probably have written a letter, but I didn't.
I mean, they talk about relevance.
I mean, you finally asked, well, did you like the book or not?
You know, I mean, what about the book that you're supposed to be reviewing?
I mean, does that seem to... Well, she never reviewed it.
She was so outraged by the comments I had made in the women's room.
But she finally, this was the opportunity to weigh in with it.
I say things like Lear, you know, which I have to play, I revere.
I think it's the greatest thing ever, maybe one of the greatest pieces of literature ever written.
You know, he doesn't end up on the heat or whatever.
He ends up an old man drooling over his oatmeal in, you know, a cottage in Scarfdale or something.
She didn't like any of it.
It's funny.
I wrote something.
I did a number.
I remember the Shakespeare book, in fact.
I have it here.
That's got to be quite a few years ago.
That's at least 15 years ago, I would think, the Shakespeare book.
Yeah, I would say.
It seems to me.
I don't have to take up too much of your time, by the way, but I do have a couple of questions.
Where do you weigh in on this debate on the literary canon?
I mean, just to switch gears.
I'm writing a book now myself, where I hope to pay some attention to this, and without taking sides at all, believe me, but just to kind of enter this debate in.
It's fascinating me.
This whole debate on the literary canon relevance of books that should be in the... There's a book on the front page of the New York Times this Sunday about the fellow who goes back to school, Denby's book, and he takes the literature...
courses that he took 30 years ago.
Do you have any opinions on this debate or any observations that you care to share with me?
Well, of course, I don't teach anymore and I haven't for some years, but I think that the debate is largely a lot of hot air in a balloon.
The fact is that most courses are still heavily weighed down by the old classics.
I don't really see them being endangered anymore than they have been endangered over the past couple of hundred years because students can't read them.
Now, if anything is endangering the literary canon of the past, it's the illiteracy of new generation of students.
When I was teaching in my early years, not at Harvard, of course.
At Harvard, you got a different class of students, but when I taught elsewhere,
Students couldn't read Milton.
To read Chaucer, you have to almost learn a new language.
Now, I happen to love Chaucer and Milton, but teaching Shakespeare, it's very difficult to get students to understand it because it's a different language.
And of course, it's early.
And Milton, who will write maybe 12 or 15 lines of verse before the main verb of the main clause appears,
really throws them.
And in fact, that's how I taught it when I taught it, was look for the subject of the sentence and then look for the verb.
And then they could maybe make a little headway.
And this is what's endangering the traditional canon.
Which is, which is, should be encouraged to read books by someone like Genoa Abebe or, I mean, of course they should.
These are wonderful things.
It's not as though, because they're written by black people or women, they're not as good as what Trollope wrote or what Dickens wrote.
That is a ridiculous idea.
How do you feel when you hear, for instance, now that you can get a degree in English literature from Georgetown without being required to study Shakespeare?
Well, I think it's a loss.
But as I say,
The loss lies elsewhere than in the faculty's selection of material.
It is a loss in literacy, and it is general.
It is across the board, and it is a result of TV.
And I don't think there's anything you can do to change it.
I don't think that people will be able to read Milton.
It'll be like when we went to school, when I went to school, Beowulf,
You know, you really had to take a course in Old English before you could study Beowulf.
And I imagine that Chaucer is practically in that condition now.
But, I mean, I remember reading, I was an English major back in the 60s.
I mean, I remember reading Beowulf and reading Chaucer.
But you had to take a course in Old English to read Beowulf.
Well, there you go.
But, I mean, so what's wrong with that?
Nothing is wrong.
If you're going to be an English major.
Nothing is wrong with it except kids don't want to do it.
And they won't do it, I guess.
That's right.
And they don't take them, and they don't understand.
And what is the point of forcing them to read something they don't understand and they don't have patience for when they could be reading something they do understand?
At least that way they're reading.
Look, I am a traditionalist in many ways.
I revere the literature of the past.
But I think that maybe it's better for us to read Chinoa Bebe than to read the Iliad.
The Iliad is...
A horrible story, really.
We don't read it in Greek to begin with.
All right, so we understand literary references.
We understand the meaning of the word Achilles, the full meaning of that word, or the full meaning of the word Hector.
We understand a story that's referred to in other literature, but not the literature of today for the most part, because the people who are writing the literature of today
For the most part, never read the Iliad or wouldn't think of referring to it.
I don't know.
I wish we could all read everything.
That would be my wish.
But I want to be reading what's new and what's being written now by people who are looking at the world with fresh eyes.
I also want and always wanted to know the work of the past.
but there's a limit to how much you can teach in four years in an English course, let's say.
When, for instance, new proofs come along in mathematics, what happens is the whole system gears up a notch so that the earlier people are given less time.
And there's no argument about tradition then, because the old things have been superseded by new ideas.
You learn the old ideas, but, you know, you don't spend the whole term on them as you might once have.
You might have in the 14th or 15th century.
This is literature.
You have to let some of the old go.
And anyway, as I said, really, the argument is a non-argument because what the real fact is is that kids can't read.
They can't read literature.
They can read words.
They can read newspapers, maybe.
That's really frightening, isn't it?
Yes.
And do you subscribe to this?
There's a brand new book I just got from Norton.
I haven't had a chance to read it all, but I've been certainly impressed by the essays I've read called Dumbing Down.
You know, that's a phrase we've encountered in the last couple of years.
Do you see a pervasive sense of a dumbing down everywhere across the board?
I have a brand new word for a major TV station.
as the newscaster and talked about orders coming through the newsroom dumb down the news and we all know it has been compared the evening news now to the evening news 30 years you may not be old enough trust me i am i'm in my mid 50s well then you know and i've been a student of the news i'm a really a careful student of it uh
quite some time.
But the news, but also in the works that come.